our next speaker uh is John maida who is
an American technologist and product
experience leader across consumer uh and
Enterprise and he was an early Catalyst
for generative Art and computational
Design for commercial applications
across web 2 and web 3 John is also the
author of Five Books including his most
recent book how to speak machine and the
media arts classic creative code he is
also an online influencer and an
investor in diverse startups though he's
currently serving as VP of engineering
head of computational design and AI
platform at Microsoft John has held a
very wide range of uh roles in art
technology uh in design including but
not limited to Chief technology officer
of everbridge Kleiner Perkins partner uh
automatic head of design and inclusion
publist Sapient executive BR vice
president and chief experience offer and
16th president/ceo of Rhode Island
School of Design please give a warm
welcome to John
MAA thank you
Kate okay thank you Kate uh all right so
uh I like to be interactive so if you
can like uh get on the car uh clown car
a bit and if you can hit the thumbs up
we'll know you're
there um let's see oh we have a
millennial gen Z power here okay and um
you can ask a question anytime is the
point and I'll just stop and answer a
question otherwise you know I'm just
like a a video instead so go ahead and
ask a question and we'll sort of get to
it here we go uh I am on LinkedIn
learning uh teaching different
Enterprises AI stuff if you're curious
about a new course I have on risk
management available and on YouTube I
have something called mr's cozy AI
kitchen if you want to get cozy with
large language models and play with code
uh got that
there um I was just looking at my
flicker stream actually and uh it was
kind of fun you know I like uh uh every
want flicker no maybe not uh but um this
is one of my favorite image favorite uh
Chinese restaurant fortune cookie
thingss the great pleasure in life is
doing what people say you cannot
do I think I've sort of like held to
that as my like instruction in life um
and um
again ask any question you like and
we'll stop okay so who am I I was like
sort of over there and thinking I was
hanging out with basically part of my
family and it it meant so much to me
because um uh I was the guy in the 90s
who used to say that it's important for
artists and designers to code and people
hated me then um but I love how like
years later it's kind of okay so that's
a good a good
outcome and um I was lucky to study at
MIT in the 80s and I had this professor
uh Dr Joseph weisen bom who really can't
show up on CNN or whatever as an AI
Godfather because most of them are dead
but uh he's a pretty important guy um I
was uh an MIT sophomore and I was taking
Ai and I thought I got the bad
recitation
instructor my friends got the cooler one
and I got this guy Joseph wison bomb and
I of course like skipped his classes and
stuff and then like a few years later I
realized whoa very important
guy um created the first chatbot Eliza
and what's really important about Dr
weisen bomb's history is that he
invented Eliza uh in the 1960s and uh he
got the chatbot running on his thing and
he he stepped away from his terminal for
the evening and his grad student showed
up and wanted to
talk to Dr weisen bomb and thought that
he was on the other end so I started
talking to Dr weisen bomb not right and
then the next morning he says like oh Dr
weisen bomb what an amazing conversation
we had you know and uh but Dr weisen
bomb unlike many entrepreneurial
technology people didn't go off and make
a startup he questioned this
technology because as a youth he fled
Nazi Germany and questioned what happens
when you have powerful Technologies in
the wrong hands so he didn't
commercialize it he went the complete
other direction 1970s he wrote this book
computer power and human reason and I
love this passage it reads I knew of
course that people form all sorts of
emotional bonds to machines for examples
to musical instruments motorcycles and
cars you know like your your favorite
knife Lola or your quizen art Steve be
like ah yeah says personify it and he
said I knew from long experience that
the strong emotional ties many
programmers you know computer rage have
to their computers are often formed
after only short exposure to their
machines been on to saying what I not
realized is that small exposures to
relatively simple computer program could
induce powerful delusional thinking in
quite normal people so in the 70s he
realized he can be at any education
level that primitive Eliza oh is that a
person there whoa you know so now we're
years later and a lot of people when
they're talking to this thing they have
that delusion that Pandora's Box that Dr
weison bum pointed out since the 60s and
so that's why I like to say uh to
everyone that it's understandable and
when you feel it's understandable you
can feel more
powerful um I know that Professor Levan
is here to speak and he is at Carnegie
melan University uh where there was a
famous Professor named Herbert Simon who
people know in the computer science
world the design world and the business
world having received the Nobel Prize in
behavioral economics you know Conan's
fast thinking slow thinking uh Dr Simon
is the OG of that era uh he was also an
AI Pioneer and he had a really simple
model of human intelligence that I like
to repeat to a lot of executive
audiences who are trying to get it it's
the following it's that the human brain
works like two two blades two blades
cooperating in the pair of scissors one
blade is the cognitive Blade the other
blade is a context blade if you
translate that to Modern large language
model science or sort of a craft you
have the completion blade which is a
cognition Blade the guise of cognition
as something that means I can answer
this
question the other is the context blade
which we have in embeddings models
so-called similarity models the ability
to sort of find similar things to
extract context
so when we think to the chat GPT moment
of 2022 a large aspect of that is to
remember that the two blades appeared on
Earth at the same time with uh
incredible capability at the same time
therefore snip snip snip the now like to
point out is that uh one blade let's
let's say like um you have someone who's
uh really uh uh um smart but has
Amnesia it can happen right like oh my
gosh they're missing in context or you
can have someone with all the context in
the world but not that smart like my
younger brother so stuff like that
happens so you need the combination of
both to have that intelligence and
having both means you sort of like
almost chat with your scissors right and
as and as our parents always said don't
run with
scissors so other piece okay uh so AI is
just a technology just feel that in you
in know us and it gets sort of uh oh
okay well maybe uh it can be used for
either good or for bad uh most people
forget that the Nobel Prize in peace
that was uh funded by someone named
Alfred Nobel who happened to invent
Dynamite which was an amazing technology
to save minor lives but also use in War
caused more deaths in that we know in
humankind so technology has these two
sides and I'm so glad to be in this art
World Kate whoa forgot the art World
asks questions about technology in a
critical way uses them in a critical way
gets people sometimes to acknowledge
that and that's really important work so
I'm really glad to be here today with
you all um so quiz the GPT of chat GPT
stands for what uh First Choice General
practical Transformer second choice
generative pre-trained Transformer third
choice generous procedural
Transformer the last one is for
Midwestern people you know they like or
Canadians okay so wow this this audience
is actually highly highly tuned in I
will tell you that in an audience of
different oh no Midwestern appeared um
the general practical Transformer sounds
more Technical and like oh useful so but
uh really the second one is uh is is the
one but um what I love is that of the
letters GPT which one means you don't
have to train the AI model
anymore generative pre-trained or
Transformer okay this is my favorite one
because every audience has a problem
noticing that the word pre-trained means
don't have to train it
anymore it's a big
thing uh it's
because the bi the bias of AI
what happened I'm not sure they oh
you're you're you're going for it okay
um the bias of the of AI people how many
of you been working in machine learning
more than 10 years more than 10 years
people so you remember it's like never
say the word AI people will laugh at you
at parties uh machine learning used to
be hard it still is hard but a
pre-trained model means it's good out of
the box and it's really hard for us to
appreciate this moment because it's kind
of like um uh frozen food frozen dinner
like I grew up in a family that would
once in a while have a Swanson Salisbury
steak dinner frozen dinner you know what
I'm talking about maybe not but frozen
dinners used to be really bad and so
we're used to having bad frozen dinners
it's like oh you know machine learning
model it's like a frozen dinner not that
great accuracy rate 71.2% don't trust it
ah not delicious
but these New pre-trained Foundation
models are completely different it's
like a two Michelin star frozen
dinner it is a Quantum Leap it's hard to
appreciate and so that's the era we're
in right
now okay so pre- chain however means
your first mile is awesome those first
few bites amazing you know and then you
have it um you had it on Monday and
you're like oh man I got to have it
again and then Tuesday it's like ah but
I need something more something more no
no this is all we've got it's like
cordon blue chicken you're like no but I
want spicy no no spicy this is how it is
you know um and so easy first smile uh
and also easy to get lazy you can be
stuck on first base with the pre-trained
models and so how do you extend them uh
further is the space that I've been
lucky to live in uh I've been living in
the Formula 1 racing grounds of AI for
the past two years now and it's been uh
quite
interesting it's funny because um uh it
was uh
2021 and I have uh parents who were in
their 80s anyone have parents in the 80s
any 80s yeah so parents in 80s and then
uh it was getting kind of difficult and
I mentioned my younger brother so it was
wasn't working out uh there in Seattle I
lived in Boston and I had to get over to
the West Coast quickly and uh my parents
uh were lived in a house uh right next
to uh Microsoft because my
brother-in-law lets them live in a house
the that he got his starter house and um
so I had to find a job in Redmond
somehow so I was like oh I'll do
anything you know so I talked to a
friend I said hey you want to work in AI
I like oh that's
embarrassing um and I was playing when
to open AI beta as a hobby and I think
oh this kind of weird this gpt3 thing I
don't know and my friend said hey if you
come over here we'll show you something
and I'm like well I don't know what it
is but I got to go take care of my
parents so I'll go so I joined Microsoft
in October of 2022 to work on AI and all
my friends laughed at me because it was
embarrassing AI right but then November
2022 chat gbt came out what timing
people think I timed it no I went to
take care of my parents so anyways I got
to play with gbg4 early on and it's been
a wild journey and o came out say oh oh
you know uh it's pretty pretty weird
time okay so my mom uh is someone that
I've making dinner for every day and um
she uh I always ask her about Ai and she
really didn't like AI for a while
because iMessage would like sort of auto
type auto correct she hated that so one
time she made me change it and then she
was okay and then recently she asked me
like could you bring it back she loves
AI so AI is good and she was in the
hospital recently and it's really hard
for older people who don't have a a
college education to understand what the
heck is the doctor saying and they're
really busy people right and they come
with
information but my my mother couldn't
parse it couldn't understand it and I
would try to explain it to it and who's
ever tried to explain to their parents
something before and gotten frustrated
raise your hand go ahead raise your hand
go oh me so I did this thing where I got
chat gbt to explain stuff to my mom it
was my mom
translator life hack
everyone use this it was amazing so
anyways uh this is life portion this
talk switching okay so um uh I've been
I've been fascinated by death for a long
time uh in my 20s I was thinking hey I'm
going to die sometime I kind of felt it
did you know this it happens eventually
uh so I wrote this little PHP program uh
and it's my website and what it is is
the life countdown so you type in your
age and it gives you the average the
number of Springs you have left Springs
are uh color and then uh non gray means
gone um and I was like oh good graph I
thought uh and then um I just you would
type it in now not good graph um you
know so I'm likeing like okay so puts
things in perspective right at least for
me um and uh I loved photos of after I
saw Lord of the Rings I was like oo
death symbol um but anyways um I'd like
to do an exercise with you all of you
and I'll switch to questions uh I have a
collection of people's regrets when
they're
dying that's a good list so I'm going to
have a sentence appear and like you read
it with me aloud ready ready there we go
okay I wish I had the courage to live a
life true to myself not the life others
expected of me good next one
I wish I hadn't worked so
hard I wish I'd had the courage to
express my feelings item
four I wish I had stayed in touch with
my friends item
five I wish that i' let myself be
happier that last one really hits you
doesn't it sort of like uh maybe some of
you figured out to be happier but I know
it's hard for me so maybe this will help
you so let me switch two questions here
uh what's the hated thing to say about
coding artist designers now if it's not
saying they should code um well what I
like is that now everyone can code with
gbt so I figure I feel like this is s
going to start going away but for those
who don't know what I'm saying they'll
say like all the things they say but uh
you got to be in the no now uh and if
you haven't tried open AI assistance
API um you're missing out on the what
llms can do right now so I highly
recommend that next one hello
hi okay uh how will po AI change of
fundamental Dynamics capitalism or will
the basic inequities remain unchanged I
don't know that's a you know people with
power have been in power for kind of a
while I'm sure you watch TV shows um
that's depicting real life um however
anomalies do occur uh I grew up in a
tofu store in Chinatown in Seattle
parents no education I'm an example of
the so-called American miracle so it
does occur sometimes um but it's
hard uh is AI Test Kitchen inspired by
your um I think it's more like I'm okay
doing that whereas most people might not
is what I discovered so and I think it's
part of that definitely I come from a
bluecollar world and I'm like blue
collar people kind of cooler than white
collar people excuse me um for what's
your favorite artist film or ar us oh uh
I love Lauren uh Lauren is one of my
favorite artists so I'm so glad to be on
the same uh thing with her so very much
so uh mty what a cool software I found
it in Sweden it's a small startup in
Sweden but now they're seem to grow I
like it a lot okay that was easy okay
Kate I'm two minutes 5 59 second
early let's give them time back
questions thank
[Applause]
you s here yep
hi John thanks for being here Kate Kate
Kate John and I have known each other
for a very long time and I would say uh
I met John when I was a freshman in an
engineering program and I was absolutely
miserable and I took uh John was
teaching a class that was called uh
fundamentals of computational media
design and it absolutely changed my life
um so I'm very uh it's it's really an
honor to have you here today and I'm so
so pleased to see you um I wanted to ask
you uh something I've always admired
about you is just how many different
like career shifts and pivots you've
made um throughout your life and I was
wondering what advice you have for
someone who is thinking about um you
know either a pivot or an outright
career change what would you um advise
them to do
um well I think there's like all kinds
of people of course but there's roughly
two camps I think one Camp stays in the
same job as long as they can and Garners
seniority that is a good
idea it is a really good
idea and then there are those who are
like no I can't do that um uh because
they are curious
people um and as curious people they're
doomed to want to see what else is out
there so for the stable people I admire
you for the less stable people um I
think if you can I think I had this
moment when I was at rhod Island School
of Design that was transformative I was
like uh you know at the time I was uh I
would always walk around campus go to
the cafeterias talk to ROM students you
know get the tray of food want to sit
with them they would say no don't sit
with me so I go walk around kind of
awkwardly kind of thing and then there
was one young woman sitting by herself
and she was like oh come here and sit I
said oh this is a trap so I sat down and
she was saying to me um you she was a
freshman and uh she just finished her
first term and it was really hard
finding everything was hard knowing
where everything was hard knowing the
senters was hard and it was just so hard
for her and it was like ah you know and
then she said but now it's like second
term and I understand stuff I know where
the mail is I know whatever is
and I can't help but feel that I'm doing
something wrong and I was like huh so
then I walked back to the main
Administrative Building the elevators
open up my all-time favorite provos
Jesse sheffron who I worked with came
out the elevator and I said Jesse this
thing happened to me and like I don't
know I was I try to understand it she
said well John artists need to feel
struggle to feel
alive so for those of you who can't be
it's cu want to feel alive that way for
the ones in Camp one you got a great
[Laughter]
401K simple I wanted to ask you if you
have uh any upcoming guests on your
cooking show that you're excited about
oh well you know what's nice about uh so
the co AI kitchen is an experiment there
was some guys that my party in my house
and they had extra green screen time and
we're doing something that is not
technically uh you know know it's sort
of like a side project but it's somehow
out there and um uh what's happening now
is that internal Microsoft people want
to be on it uh Ross the showrunner of it
said like my gosh John I asked someone
they're like yes I can be on it so
you're going to see different
demonstrations of the latest AI
technology and I help you check it out
it's meant to be something easy to
understand some people hate this show by
the way it's like oh my gosh I can't
stand this but uh some people like oh my
gosh I love it I love to be at that cusp
of like don't like you maybe like you
good
place John thanks so much for being here
with us today thank you